Before we start with the podcast, we would like to say thank you to all of you who support
the FSFE's work of money.
Working for software freedom and producing podcasts costs money.
Please consider supporting us with our nation under fsfe.org/donate and in the
show notes.
Welcome to the software freedom podcast.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe.
We are a charity that empowers users to take control of technology.
I'm Bonnie Mehring and our guest for this episode is Alexander Sandar.
Alex is the senior policy consultant for the FSFE and in his work for the FSFE, he monitors
the current happenings in the European Union and pushes for the recognition of free software.
Today we will talk about the Open Source hearing in the digital committee of the German
Bundestag.
The hearing took place in the beginning of December on the 4th of December to be precise and
Alex was invited there as an expert for the FSFE foundation Europe.
So what they discussed, we will now talk more about with Alex.
Hi Alex, nice to have you here again for our free software policy update.
Yeah, thanks a lot.
Thanks for the invitation and yeah, happy to be back.
Yeah, thank you for making the time.
It's always nice to hear here.
So you were invited as an expert for the Open Source hearing in the digital
committee of the German Bundestag.
Can you tell me a bit more about this?
Can you tell us the background?
How this happened?
Was there some previous contact?
And also can you tell me who actually organized the meeting and what was on the agenda?
Yeah, absolutely.
A lot of questions.
I'll start with the coalition treaty of the Ampelregierung, which was the government
of Germany in the last years.
And they agreed in their coalition treaty to basically follow the principle of public
money public code, so our initiative where we asked governments, public bodies, public
institutions to release free software whenever they invest in software.
And this demand was more or less put into the coalition treaty and then the government
should have worked on this.
And part of this work is that then also the Bundestag, which is the parliament in Germany,
discusses these topics and comes up with proposals, ideas, and what they want to do in
this.
So, and therefore it's pretty common, then whatever, there is a law-making process or
there's a topic where a government wants to work on or parliament works, wants to work
on that they before they start the work, that they come up with a hearing in order to
get some input from experts.
So, and this is what happened here.
So we gave them input as experts, but unfortunately, as you said, the hearing took place just a
few days ago or in this regard, maybe so already weeks ago, and there is no government anymore.
So here we see that there was already something which was not that normal, not that common
when you normally talk about hearings.
So the thing is, the last government and they didn't really work that much on Open Source.
So they did some things, for example, they followed up with the Center for Digital Democracy,
which is hosting, for example, open code to a code sharing platform for software tools for
the public administrations, but also the standards, so the Center for Digital Soranity creates
the so-called open desk, so office solution for public institutions.
However, not that much happened in between, but the parliamentarians still wanted to have
this hearing since they wanted to debate this.
And here we have to say that the pressure from the committee itself to host this hearing,
no matter if there's a government or not, was the moment that they decided to look we
want to still discuss this, even if we won't act in this term anymore.
So basically the hearing then happened because of a fight of the parliamentarians, and this
is also how the process then works, the parliamentarians who sit in this committee, which is basically,
if you like, a plenary for a specific topic, this is a committee in the parliament, so you
have the plenary in the parliament, and then you have many committees.
One on digital, for example, one on economics, the other one on security, and so on, and
so forth.
And in this digital committee there, they wanted to discuss the topic of Open Source, and then
they agreed on, so even if we didn't have the time to work on this during our term, as
we agreed in the coalition treaty, we still want to run this hearing in order to maybe also
prepare the next government, so that the knowledge, at least, is already out there.
So basically the idea of the hearing is to invite experts to gather ideas, and then out
of this input from the experts, and then also other stakeholders that come externally, law-making
process starts.
So and this happened in the hearing, and they invited basically nine experts from economics,
from civil society, that was our ticket, so to say, from research, but also from public
administrations themselves.
And these nine experts presented their positions towards the hearing, how they think, how
the government, how the next government should work on the topic of Open Source.
This was what happened there in the hearing, and that's why it happened that way and at
this time.
All right.
So even so it now does not really have an effect for the current amperage, which is not,
or which by the time we were released as podcasts, will not be the government of Germany anymore
because it will be after the 16th of December when the German Bundeskanzler will ask the
Vertrauensfrage.
I'm not sure how to say this in English, how do you say it in English?
I think this is a pretty German word, so you can go with this, I guess, so, but it's basically
the attitude to shut down the government, officially, into open and pass away for new elections.
So there is definitely no room for this government to work on this topic, but the members of
the parliament and the institution, the parliament itself, will keep record of this hearing and
the next government will definitely learn about this hearing if they don't learn by themselves.
We will tell them that it happened and that they should listen to what was said because
the hearing itself was very interesting and also from the topics that have been.
Yeah, we will come to this in a second.
Yeah, okay, sure.
Okay, okay, I just want to lay down the foundation so that we are, because not all of our listeners
are from Germany and this is a very German process, I can't imagine.
I guess it is also similar in other countries, but for now, we just lay some of the foundation.
In this committee, there were only coalition members, so there were also other parliamentarians.
No, it's, it's pretty much like, it's, it's organized like a tiny plenary.
So basically in the committee, you have less people than in a plenary, but every group is reflected
in the same amount of people or in the same percentage, like if it would have been a plenary meeting.
So if you have 300 people in a plenary, you have 30 people in the committee and then you just,
like, delete everywhere zero and that's the amount of them members that are then in this
committee to break it down.
So it's something like a small plenary session, but on a very specific topic in this case
digital.
So other members of other parties who are not currently part of the German government
are also in this hearing, they also learn about exactly.
So these are members of the parliament.
So these are, this is not the government, right?
So the parliament is disconnected from the parliament, so you find coalition groups.
So you find the groups that elected basically the government, but they are not the government.
So even if you talk to, in this regard, or in this, in this case, to social democrats,
liberals, or Greens, then you talk to the members of the parliament and not to the members
of the government.
However, the majorities in the parliament are then at these three groups in this example,
and it's likely that they will vote in the direction of the government, but even if the
government proposes a law and brings it to the parliament, members of the parliament
modified this.
So even if a law is proposed by the government, this is normally modified during the parliamentarian
process, but with the majorities of these coalition parties.
So this is the normal workflow.
In this case, so if the government would still have been there, this would have meant that
then based on our input, for us, it would have been important that these coalition parties
follow up based on what we have said.
Because there are none, basically we reached out to one could say everyone who is there.
So basically the next government, so the next parties that formed the government, this
was basically the people we tried to address in this hearing, and this is basically pretty
much more or less everyone that was there in the parliament.
All right.
Thank you very much for the foundation and the background.
And what was actually just Gus in this hearing?
So what was the position that the FSFE brought in and what was the position Althas brought
in there?
So basically every expert had the chance to submit a written statement beforehand.
So before the hearing started, and this is what we did.
So we wrote down, I think it was something like 12 to 15 pages, where we explained our
general views on the topic of Open Source in particular related to governmental actions.
So what the government should do or what the parliament should do in this regard.
So in terms of lawmaking, of implementation, of practical regulation and stuff like this.
And in the hearing itself, we had the chance to present the position in five minute statements.
So we had the chance to say for five minutes, whatever we want to do or whatever we want
to say.
And this was true for every expert.
And then after this first initial round of presenting positions, the members of the committee
had the chance to ask the experts questions that come up for them.
So basically it was this is why it's called hearing a possibility for members to ask experts
on specific things that they want to learn.
So and yeah, obviously we were not aware of potential questions.
So that's why we are experts, we can answer everything.
And so basically this is this is then true for all the nine people that have been invited.
And positions were basically pretty pro Open Source.
So even the representatives of their proprietary vendors agreed on the need for Open Source and
the values of Open Source, however, they also fought for making a point for proprietary
software.
But there was basically only one expert who got in this direction and was a representative
of small and medium enterprises here in Germany.
And but other experts were clearly going in our direction, this basically one could say
following our public money public code demand, asking for investments in Open Source, asking
for migration into Open Source, asking to get rid of the vendor log in and to pass the
way to more digital sovereignty.
And for us, it was important in our position to make clear that digital sovereignty for
example is only possible if you also use free software.
So there won't be digital sovereignty without free software.
So this is a connection we wanted to make.
Also we wanted to underline that only interoperability is possible with free software that contributes
to the goal that administration can work together that they can collaborate.
And by this on the medium and long run can also share costs and expertise.
So the arguments you pretty much know from our public money public code campaign.
And another point we made and there it was basically one could say kind of like a unique
point we brought in or a point that we're not that much discussed by others is the topic
of open washing and this is something we have already seen during the Corona crisis very
prominently.
We also wrote blog posts back in the days on this.
So that there are companies out there pretending to be free software pretending to be Open Source.
But basically they are not so we all know free software Open Source software also has always
have to for freedoms to use study share and improve.
And whenever one of these freedoms or more of these freedoms is cut, then we can't talk
about Open Source of free software.
So we often see this for example that you have for example a limitation in the use case.
So you are only allowed to use this software for 10 persons for example, right?
And this would be a case where we say look this is open washing here is somebody who pretends
to be Open Source, but he's limiting one of the freedoms.
And by thus comparable to green washing.
So this is where we got the term from.
And something similar happens at the moment in the software or in specifically in the open
source world that there are proprietary vendors who see that there's a market that in particular
governments want to have more Open Source and to be still on this market.
They pretend to be Open Source, but they are not.
And this is something we wanted to make yeah, basically parliamentarians, but also in general
the public aware of and that it is important that if you start procurement procedures that
you really get Open Source, when you want Open Source and nothing which only pretends
to be Open Source.
How are the reactions to the discussion about open washing because like this is a very
new discussion.
So it's not something that a lot of people are already aware of.
And it's something that's also a bit complicated because it's not always quite simple to see
if a product is actually really Open Source or free software.
So how are the reactions to this from the parliamentarians?
I mean, you are right.
So this is a pretty new topic and so the reaction I would say was not that they specifically
picked up the determine only discuss this, but it was clear that they understood the point
that was for example, yeah, a conversation about how do we release the code towards whom
and who should have access to the code because this is definitely something which we also
see from the German government so that they hide their project, that they hide their code.
And there is definitely a question if this is because of a license or if this is because
of a non Open Source license that they hide their code.
And here we made a point that we need to investigate and also that we need to make sure
that the code is released.
And we have also seen in the past in particular around the German procurement procedures that
there are already open versions around this is what we addressed and yeah, it was picked
up by another question, but it's also not the case in such hearings that you have a lot
of time to explain or to discuss in details because for the questions back and forth
themselves, you have another line one or two minutes.
So basically you can just put out statements again, but it was clear that the topic was
basically understood and it was also seen in the media afterwards that this was picked
up and that people understood that there might be an issue and that we need to address
this issue and that's I'd say a success for such a hearing.
So but it's very uncommon that you start a really like a in-depth debate then on this
very specific topic also hidden in mind that there have been eight other experts next
to me also with other topics and what I liked a lot is that I had the feeling that parliamentarians
really understood the values of Open Source that they understood the core idea of Open Source
or they understood the four freedoms and they understood that the four freedoms are important
also on the question of how does it benefit not only the procurement process itself, but
also we talked about spillover effects just to mention, for example, the education sector.
So that was something we also discussed so that's also very important to have free software
in education so that you are not educated to have a PowerPoint but that you are educated
to run a presentation so that you are not teach the product but rather on how to control
technology and these were more practical discussion points we had on the radar.
But for all of this, open washing definitely plays a role and there was one side question
on this and a couple of remarks in this regard so we can see that this topic is at least
on the radar of these people and that's already success.
So it's picked up.
So you already mentioned that you are all feeling or the overall atmosphere was that they are
pro Open Source and free software or that the parliamentarians who attended this were very
much in favor. Do you have the feeling that this actually changed over the years because you are
in the policy game for quite a long time now? I'm not talking about age again but just
your experience there. Do you have the feeling that it's actually that the understanding of free
software and the understanding of the four freedoms increased over the past years?
Definitely. So there is definitely so we can see a lot of progress and I mean this debate
like it has happened there 10 years ago would have been impossible even five years ago.
It would have not been this in that conversation with members of the parliament and that would
have been way more missed out there than we hear today. So and also you can see it in the law
making process or in the regulation process itself. So you can see more and more documents
that value the use of Open Source that we want to go more in this direction that we want to have
more and more and more. The only thing that we see is that we are basically at the point that
we have enough papers one could say it's start to implement this it's start to act on this
and this is I think where we lack and this is where we need to create some pressure so that we
not only talk about the advantages but that we also do something in this regard and this means
that we not just create these papers but that we also give for example resources
to these projects and that's also something where I said we need to
rethink our current approach I mean with our public money public court campaign we talk about
procurement and I think procurement is the most important part when it comes to to Open Source
in public administration. So that's the easiest and most efficient way to get and to support
free and Open Source software but there's also other things I mean there's a market out there and
I do believe that these people on the market in particular those who only benefit from free software
should also contribute back to the free software ecosystem and here I do believe that we also need
rules and this is something we're also asked the parliamentarians to work on so to come up as
funding for free software not only from the government but also from the market themselves
and here this is something where we need to work on and where we need to create pressure
that there's implementation last time we met we discussed how the European Commission
removed funds needed funds for core infrastructure projects for free software this is the wrong
direction you cannot say on the one hand we want to invest in Open Source and we want to go in
this direction and then we move these funds on the other hand this is the wrong way and this is
also something where we need to have an eye on it's not only about good words it's also about
resources it's about acting it's about doing at a long term perspective especially
absolutely I mean we made it that they understood our point now we need to make them doing
we have to feeling that something is happening in this direction as well because I would absolutely
agree there's a lot of paper on Open Source or free software in public procurement and there's a
lot of talk about using free software in the public administration but so far very little is happening
can you like tell me a bit more about your idea or your feeling in this direction and if there's
if there will be more happening in the next period what's your feeling I know it's a guest question
I know we can't say for sure but yeah and particularly in this time since we even do not know
election results it's pretty difficult it depends and this is very clear on the way of the parties
and that will form the next government yeah and here we will again try that we get our sayings in
the coalition treaty and a very concrete point we will have is that we for example have this
agenda for digital sovereignty which I just mentioned earlier that have these tools that they
already work on and that they want to have a yeah office solution which is free software for
the German and maybe even European administrations out there but this needs funding so this needs
resources and here we will definitely ask for resources and make sure that these resources also
only go into free software that's a that's a very concrete and practical thing to do and this is
something which I do believe will be followed up by the next government in some way the question is
how much resources do they give them and how much do they value what they do so there will be
there will be some follow-up so to say and this tenders won't die with the next government
but the question is will it be a real center for digital sovereignty or will it only be
something that has the name to be a center all right so we need to see what's happening in the next
few months yeah we have to fight for this and this is what we will do so basically at the moment
we are already reaching out also based on this hearing and trying to identify those who most
likely will negotiate the next coalition treaties and try to present them our positions make them
aware that we can be asked as experts so if they want to write text or if they want to come up with
new ideas or rules that they can reach out to us and that we help them yeah to find a good
position on this and by thus influence the coalition treaty but then also based on this
what happened in the past and what is needed for the future so that we face them basically
with the real world problems that are out there when it comes to the use of software and then
it's clear we have to go in the direction of resoftware and we continue this path and as you said
it's a long term game so nothing is one nothing is lost but we continue
right so we should definitely keep an eye on this and I think we will talk about this more in the
future yeah maybe one quick remark on this so there's also recording of the whole hearing on our
media.fsc.e.org channel but there's also a version which is only cut to the statements which
I presented for the FSC which is 12 minutes so if you are happened to be a German speaker or
if you know somebody who can translate this to you for free to watch this to get an impression
of the whole hearing but also our takes and can also find the written statement this is also
public yeah if in the moment it's only available in German but we think about translating it into
English since this is yeah also true for pretty much every government and I want to distribute it
over there so we will also use this hearing in order to reach out to other countries other governments
and telling them about our expert position and so the name of the Bundestag definitely gives this
gives the topic some sort of relevance and by thus we can go to others tell them about
this hearing in a best practice story and create momentum maybe even in other countries so it's
not limited on German what we are doing Mr. Singh but we try to create yeah or use this resource
also for other countries so that we can have impact not only in Germany but European right all right
out of the resources are also linked in the show notes and now we have talked quite a lot about
what we need to do in the future what's happening right now what's happened what happened in
this hearing and how this hearing helped us I would like to come to my final question and ask you
what was the most positive thing that you saw about the invite and the hearing itself so
what was that that stood out for you I think there was a moment in the hearing when
the representative of this SME group who is pretty much a favor of proper derives of there
when he got the question by basically a liberal member of the parliament and
basically when he tried to explain why his solutions are also digital serenity
digital serenity got stopped by the MP the liberal MP who asked the question and he just said look
I'm also coming from the SME world and in particular SMEs are pretty innovative and the market
changed and you should go with the market and the market is now Open Source so and this is I think
something which shows how the market also changed and how also liberals already look at this market
and see that yeah it's a market for Open Source and that you as a company should rather adapt
if you want to be around in the software market in the future and I think that's something
that many companies should think of when a liberal MP tells them that the market changed
yeah that's quite outstanding I'm really happy now that I asked this question
you know you know what I found so fascinating about this is that the FSFE has been doing
and is still doing incredible work for free software and you would have imagined 10 years ago
that you would sit in a committee like this and be invited as an expert I think this is amazing how
far we have gotten and this is only possible because of the support we receive from all the people
that are out there and that are donating to the FSFE that are being volunteers of ours
this is also something really incredible how far we have gotten over the past years
yeah and in particular I mean it could have happened that we have been invited to a hearing
but it would have only been us with this position and now we have a hearing that the
proprietary person is the only one with this position and all the others are Open Source and I
think that's the thing that changed and that they listen to us they might have even invited us
in the past but we would have been the one person and this changed into eight persons
and the one not talking about Open Source is singled out and even told by the MP that he might have
to sing about his position absolutely and he's right so I have to say this liberal MP was right
all right thank you very much Alex for sharing all the background the story and for giving us
more insight was a pleasure to have you same here thanks a lot this was the software freedom podcast
if you liked this episode please recommend it to your friends and rated stay tuned for more inspiring
conversations that implore them explore the importance of software freedom and its impact on our
digitalize this podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe and we are a
charity that works on promoting software freedom if you like our work please consider supporting
us with a donation you find more information under fsfe.org/donate also linked in the show
notes thank you very much and bye bye stay tuned until next time